refactor mcp docs (#8704)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp.md

Reviewer: What are your thoughts on cleaning up the mention of each tool + description (ie removing them and pointing directly to the dbt MCP tools in the README? This is motivated by automation that was addressed in [this](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-mcp/issues/569) issue where each tool is automatically documented and updated in the README. Since these are now automated within the dbt MCP repo/docs , it prevents manual PRs needed to update and maintain tools + descriptions in this repo as well.

Author: hey @jairus-m this is awesome! i've created a script that can auto fetch the readme so we have the same tools in the docs to help the user avoid having to context switch or go to another page. the question i have though is that the current docs have add'l intro sentences for some of the tools (e.g codegen) and some tools have env variable info. is there a way we can add the intro to the readme (once) so it's there in teh readme + when we fetch the https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dbt-labs/dbt-mcp/main/README.md?

Author: <img width="1016" height="683" alt="Screenshot 2026-03-06 at 15 17 20" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6d09d352-4016-475b-b5c6-d736716b674a" />

# About dbt Model Context Protocol (MCP) server

<IntroText>

The [dbt MCP server](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-mcp) provides a standardized framework that lets you integrate AI applications with dbt‑managed data assets across different data platforms. This ensures consistent, governed access to models, metrics, lineage, and freshness across your AI tools.

</IntroText>

> As AI becomes more deeply integrated into data workflows, dbt users need a seamless way to access and integrate dbt's structured metadata and execution context effectively. This page provides an overview of dbt's MCP Server, which exposes this context, supporting use cases such as conversational access to data, agent-driven automation of dbt workflows, and AI-assisted development.

Reviewer 2: > execution context effectively.

What is execution context?

Why do users need "a seamless way to access and integrate..."

Reviewer 2: Are we saying that "conversational access to data, agent-driven automation of dbt workflows, and AI-assisted development" are things this "execution context" provides?

Author: i didn't write the original language but i can try to rewrite to address your feedback.

Author: ok updated to:

> To help with dbt, assistants need your project metadata and, when you allow it, supported actions such as CLI runs, platform APIs, and Semantic Layer queries. The dbt MCP server exposes those to MCP clients and supports use cases such as conversational access to data, agentic automation for dbt workflows, and AI-assisted development. This page covers local and remote setups, available tools, and how to get started.

The MCP server provides access to the <Constant name="platform_cli"/>, [API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview), the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api), and [Semantic Layer](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-sl). It provides access to private APIs, text-to-SQL, and SQL execution.

For more information on MCP, have a look at [Get started with the Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction).

## Get started

> To get started, choose the quick start that matches your setup:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started, choose the quickstart that matches your setup:
```

<SimpleTable>

> | I want to... | Quickstart |

Reviewer 2: I wonder if users would be thinking about how they want to use the MCP server before thinking about how they'll connect to it. Especially of some connections have limitations. 

For example, down further we say local is better for "development workflows, like authoring dbt models, tests, and documentation." For remote, we say "consumption based workflows like querying metrics, exploring metadata, viewing lineage"

So maybe the get started could be three columns so the goal and connection method is clear?

Author: refined table

| --- | --- |

> | Connect to my <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> account (<Constant name="semantic_layer" />, Discovery API, Admin API, SQL). Uses [local MCP server](#local-mcp-server). | [Connect to <Constant name="dbt_platform"/>](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-quickstart-oauth) |

Reviewer 2: In row 3, we say it's for to querying data only; no running dbt commands. 

Should we add to the first two rows that they can query data and run dbt commands? Are there any other benefits of the local MCP server?

| Use <Constant name="platform_cli"/> commands locally, without or with a <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> account. Uses [local MCP server](#local-mcp-server).| [Run dbt locally](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-quickstart-cli) |
| Use MCP with zero local install (to query data only; no running dbt commands). Uses [remote MCP server](#remote-mcp-server). | [Use MCP with zero install](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-quickstart-remote) |
</SimpleTable>

To configure or disable specific tools (local MCP), see the [Environment variables reference](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-environment-variables).

## Server access

> You can use the dbt MCP server in the following ways:

Reviewer 2: This section is great. I almost wonder if it would be better before the Get started?

> ### Supported tools by MCP server type

Reviewer 2: This might be more helpful at the beginning of "Available tools" section

The dbt MCP server has access to many parts of the dbt experience related to development, deployment, and discovery. Here are the categories of tools supported based on what form of the MCP server you connect to as well as detailed information on exact commands or queries available to the LLM.

> Local MCP is required for <Constant name="platform_cli"/> commands, Codegen, and Administrative API; remote supports <Constant name="semantic_layer" />, SQL, Discovery, and <Constant name="fusion" /> tools only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local MCP is required for <Constant name="platform_cli"/> commands, Codegen, and Administrative API; remote MCP supports <Constant name="semantic_layer" />, SQL, Discovery, and <Constant name="fusion" /> tools only.
```

Note that access to the [dbt APIs](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview) is limited depending on your [plan type](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing).

> | Tools | Local | Remote |

Reviewer 2: This table is awesome and so helpful!
